[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Namaste.
Welcome to "Thrive,
Self-healing with Ayurveda."
I'm Justine Lemos.
I'm an Ayurvedic practitioner
and yoga teacher.
In this video,
I'll be sharing how
to make delicious
fresh chutneys.
Ayurveda is the science of life.
It's a holistic system
of wellness that
originates in ancient India.
So in this video, we'll be
making fresh fruit, spice,
and vegetable chutneys.
Be sure to check out my video
so that you can find out
which of these chutneys
would be perfectly matched
to balance your physiology
and stimulate your digestion.
So let's go ahead
and get started.
The first chutney
that we'll make
is to balance what
we call vata dosha.
The doshas are the
intelligences of the body,
and vata dosha is
made of air and ether.
When someone has a lot of
vata dosha in their body,
it will manifest in things
like dry skin, constipation,
and anxiety.
So this chutney is warming,
grounding, nurturing,
and soothing.
I love making these
fresh chutneys.
Oftentimes, they're like
a hit of a dinner party.
When I have them, they really
impress all of my friends,
because they're so
delicious and they really
make every meal have
something special in them.
So our first chutney
is for vata dosha,
and it's going to contain a
lot of really juicy dates,
and raisins, and orange
juice-- sweet taste--
to ground vata dosha and
to stimulate digestion.
So we're going to start with
placing some pitted dates
into a food processor.
I'll use about a cup
of fresh dates, which
is going to really be the
base of this fresh chutney.
All of our chutneys
are fresh, as
opposed to the kind of
sticky jam-like substances
that you might find in a jar.
They really transmit
a lot of life force,
or ojas, into whoever eats them.
So I've got about a cup of
dates in the food processor.
I'm also going to put raisins
in, about a half a cup,
like that.
And these juicy dried
fruits are going
to communicate a lot of
nurturing energy to the body.
Next thing, I'm going
to use fennel seeds.
About a teaspoon
of fennel seeds.
And fennel seeds really calm
and soothe the digestion.
So if you have any gas,
or pain, or bloating,
they're really great for you.
I'll also use some cumin seeds.
Cumin seeds are very warming.
I'll use about a
half a teaspoon.
So these also act to warm the
body and stimulate digestion.
I'll use some ground coriander,
about a half a teaspoon.
And this really
pacifies all three
of the doshas, what
we call the doshas.
I'm going to use some orange
juice, about a half a cup
of orange juice, in here.
And then fresh ginger root.
And here, I'll use
a few tablespoons
of fresh ginger root.
That's going to provide the
really pungent, warm flavor
to this chutney.
So I just put it all
into a food processor.
You can also use a blender.
It works very well.
And I'm going to mix it all up.
[MACHINE WHIRRS]
And then I'm going
to have-- the smell
is so fragrant and delicious.
And I'll have this
delicious fresh chutney.
Now, the way to use
our fresh chutneys
is we usually take them,
about a teaspoon or so,
about 20 minutes before we
eat a main meal, like lunch
or dinner.
And taking the chutney
before we eat our meal
acts to kind of excite
and awaken our digestion.
And then, because the
chutneys are so delicious,
we'll really want to eat
them again with our meal,
like as a condiment on the side.
So this vata chutney
that I just finished,
it has a really unusual taste.
It's sweet and
it's also pungent.
So it's warm, it's spicy,
because of the ginger
and the spices in it.
And when you eat a
little bit of it,
your whole mouth
starts to salivate.
And really, you can feel how
it gets your digestive enzymes
working in preparation for the
meal that you're about to eat.
Now, you may be more familiar
with kind of chutneys
that are like marmalade.
They come in a jar.
They're preserved.
They're really sweet,
like mango chutney.
And these fresh chutneys are
really different than that.
The fresh fruit and
fresh ingredients,
while they stimulate
digestion, they also
transmit this great
vitality, or what
we call it ojas in
Ayurveda, in our bodies.
So the second chutney
that I'm going to make
is for what we call pitta dosha.
And pitta dosha is
responsible for all the fires
in our bodies.
And someone who has more
pitta in their constitution
will be of medium builds.
They'll be more intense.
If they're experiencing, or
if anyone is experiencing
a pitta dosha
imbalance, it might
manifest in early
morning wakings
between the hours of 2:00 and
4:00 AM, rashes, irritability.
These types of things are
indicative of a pitta dosha
imbalance.
So the ingredients that I'm
going to use in this chutney
are more cooling
and sweet, which
are flavors that pacify
what we call pitta dosha.
It's a combination of
cilantro and apple.
Or you can use pear.
And I often make
this for friends
who like to eat a lot of salsa.
And salsa, because it has
a lot of garlic in it,
can be too healing
for many people who
have a lot of pitta dosha
in their constitution.
So I often use it
as a substitute
for a kind of really
intense salsa,
or a heating pungent flavor.
So I'm going to take about a
cup, maybe a little bit more,
of cilantro, fresh cilantro.
And then I'll use
apple, about a cup.
One to two apples or pears.
It kind of depends upon
the size of the fruit.
And then lemon juice.
A few tablespoons
to a half a cup.
You want the consistency to
be kind of chunky and fresh
but not watery.
And then a bit of salt.
And some fresh turbinado sugar.
And the sweet flavor
of the turbinado sugar
is really cooling and
pacifying to pitta dosha.
So this pitta chutney has a
very sweet and bright flavor.
[MACHINE WHIRRS]
I'm just going to add a
bit more liquid to this.
So it just depends
upon your ingredients
and as well as your mixer about
how things are going to mix.
So I'm going to add a
little bit more citrus
to get it to mix really well.
Like I said, you don't want
the consistency too watery,
but you also want it
to all mix together.
[MACHINE WHIRRS]
Good.
Hmm.
So you can see this chutney
I just made, sometimes it
comes out more chunky.
You can also just chop
all your ingredients
and mix them together.
This has a more liquidy
kind of constitution.
And that's really great.
It's kind of the
consistency of pesto.
So you can make it either
more chunky or more smooth.
And this is the pitta chutney.
The final chutney that I'll
make is for kapha dosha.
And kapha dosha is a
constitutional type
that is heavier.
It might retain weight.
There might be mucus
or water retention.
And so this chutney,
to tame kapha dosha,
uses a lot of pungency,
a lot of heat,
to stimulate digestion
and get things moving.
So in this chutney, we're
going to use some peeled
ginger, quite a lot.
Fresh peeled ginger,
almost a half a cup.
And some raisins,
some soaked reasons
that are really plumped
up because they've
been soaking in water.
And then I'll add a couple
of tablespoons of lime juice
to transmit a sour flavor.
And then orange juice, about
a half a cup of orange juice.
And then I'm just going
to place this into a food
processor or a blender.
Or I can also chop it
all if I don't have
a food processor or a blender.
And--
[MACHINE WHIRRS]
So this chutney is really
gingery, really pungent,
really fiery.
So be sure to check out the
other two cooking videos
in this series, which guides you
in creating a complete healing
Ayurvedic meal.
We've made churnas, which are
Ayurvedic spice mixtures used
to maximize digestion and
create balance in the body.
And then these chutneys
which I just shared with you.
And then my friend Kishan
created khichdi, which
is a balancing Ayurvedic dish.
So I'm going to bring
him in and we're
going to try some
of this khichdi
with the chutneys and churnas.
>> Hey, Justine,
how are you doing?
>> I'm doing really well.
>> Look what I have.
A couple of bowls of khichdi.
So khichdi is made
from split mung
bean, which is a very small
yellow bean when it's split.
But when you see it
in the store-- maybe
it just has whole mung
bean-- it'll be green.
And what they do is they
break that shell off
and it's much easier to digest.
And because the
shell is off, you
don't have gas buildup
after digesting it.
The second and main ingredient
is white, long basmati rice.
And there's a mixture of
digestive herbs in there
as well.
>> Mmm, it smells so good.
>> Thank you.
>> So what do you
want to try it with?
>> Let's try the-- this one
looks like it's got a lot
of ginger.
I'd love to try that one first.
>> Yes, this is
the kapha chutney,
so it's really heating.
>> Yum.
>> And I really want to know
what you think about it.
>> Cool.
Let's do this.
Mmm.
A little sour and pungent.
Very spicy.
>> Um-hm, super spicy.
>> Yes.
I love that sharp, fresh ginger.
>> This shouldn't be taken
for people with ulcers.
It's just too heating, and it
could create further imbalance.
So really for people with
a lot of water retention--
>> Loving it.
>> --heaviness in the body.
This is the vata chutney,
or vata pacifying chutney.
>> Evidently, dates.
>> Um-hm, and raisins.
>> Sweet, yum.
>> Um-hm, sweet.
>> Mmm.
Oh my gosh.
I just feel that take my
body down into itself.
Really awesome.
>> Yes, super grounded.
>> Yeah.
>> Yes.
Totally.
>> I love it.
>> And then this is
the pitta chutney.
>> Oh, sweet.
Yum.
>> Yes.
Super sweet, super grounding.
And you can taste--
it's interesting
because you can taste
the cumin in there,
which is unusual for most
Westerners, with the dates.
It's like an
unusual combination.
>> Coriander.
Or cilantro?
>> Cilantro, yes.
>> That's right.
>> Cilantro, apple, lemon.
>> Oh my gosh.
The addition of
the apple really--
it changed it up.
It's something new for me.
I love it.
>> Yes.
It's really bright.
I always think that the
taste is really bright
and provides this nice
illumination to the palate.
>> Nice surprise, thank you.
>> Yes.
Really. you're welcome.
>> That was delicious.
>> You can also add any of these
churnas, or spice mixtures.
You can just use them on top.
Or when you cook your khichdi,
you can also use them.
So here's a little
bit of churna for you.
>> Really amazing.
So the combination
of that churna,
that little bit of churna
on top, and some small taste
of the three chutneys,
along with the khichdi,
is so delicious.
Thank you for bringing this.
>> You're welcome.
>> Yes.
>> Don't forget to explore the
rest of the series by watching
our docuseries, yoga
practices, meditations,
and self-care videos.
[MUSIC PLAYING]